docs: dashboards (#1173)
pydantic/logfire: docs/guides/web-ui/dashboards.md

# Dashboards

This guide explains how to use dashboards in the Logfire UI to visualize your observability data. Dashboards allow you to create custom visualizations using SQL queries.

---

## Overview

There are two types of dashboards:

* **Standard dashboards**: Pre-configured dashboards created and maintained by the Logfire team. You can enable them for your project, but you can't modify them directly.
* **Custom dashboards**: Dashboards that you create. They are fully editable and customizable, allowing you to define queries, layouts, chart types, and variables.

The easiest way to get started with dashboards is to enable a standard one.

---

## Enabling a Standard Dashboard

To enable a standard dashboard:

1. Go to the **Dashboards** tab in the top navigation bar.
2. Click the **+ Dashboard** button.
3. Browse the list of available dashboards under the **Standard** tab.
4. Click **Enable dashboard** to add it to your project.

You can view and interact with standard dashboards, but you cannot edit them.

### Using a Standard Dashboard as a Template

You can use any standard dashboard as a template by exporting it and then importing it as a custom dashboard.

> 1. From a standard dashboard, click the **Download dashboard as code** icon in the toolbar.

Reviewer: Needs a screenshot

To add a new group, click the **Panel Group** button in the top right. You can name the group and set whether it should be expanded or collapsed by default when the dashboard loads.

To add a new visualization, you add a panel to a group. Click the **Panel** button in the top right. Inside each panel, you'll configure a chart and the SQL query that powers it.

You can rearrange and resize panels by dragging and dropping them after clicking the **Edit layout** button.

### Chart Types

Logfire supports these chart types:

| Chart Type  | Query Type         | Description                          |
| ----------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------ |
| Time Series | TimeSeriesQuery    | Data points over time                |
| Gauge       | TimeSeriesQuery    | Shows current value as a gauge       |
| Table       | NonTimeSeriesQuery | Tabular data with rows and columns   |
| Bar Chart   | NonTimeSeriesQuery | Comparisons across categories        |
| Pie Chart   | NonTimeSeriesQuery | Data as slices of a circle |
| Values      | NonTimeSeriesQuery | Values displayed as tiles |

!!! note

>     Queries with `TimeSeriesQuery` as the **Query Type** must return a timestamp column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Queries with `TimeSeriesQuery` as the **Query Type** must include a timestamp in the selected columns, typically `time_bucket($resolution, start_timestamp)` when querying `records` or `time_bucket($resolution, recorded_timestamp)` when querying `metrics` - see [below](#resolution-variable). This will be used as the x-axis.
```

To configure a chart:

1. Choose the chart type.
2. Write your SQL query.
3. Customize the formatting, labels, and appearance.

---

## Writing Queries

Logfire uses SQL to define dashboard queries.

If you're unsure which tables or columns are available, refer to the [records schema](explore.md#records-schema) and [metrics schema](explore.md#metrics-schema).

### Variable Usage

You can reference dashboard variables in SQL queries using the `$variable` syntax:

```sql

> SELECT * FROM records WHERE service = $service_name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT * FROM records WHERE service_name = $service_name
```

There's no `service` column.

But also this makes it sound like there's some built in `$service_name` variable. You're explaining how to use variables in queries before how to define them. Users won't know what you're saying.

This query forces the user to fill in a service name, it doesn't allow seeing the full set of records unfiltered.

To add a new group, click the **Panel Group** button in the top right. You can name the group and set whether it should be expanded or collapsed by default when the dashboard loads.

To add a new visualization, you add a panel to a group. Click the **Panel** button in the top right. Inside each panel, you'll configure a chart and the SQL query that powers it.

You can rearrange and resize panels by dragging and dropping them after clicking the **Edit layout** button.

### Chart Types

Logfire supports these chart types:

| Chart Type  | Query Type         | Description                          |
| ----------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------ |
| Time Series | TimeSeriesQuery    | Data points over time                |
| Gauge       | TimeSeriesQuery    | Shows current value as a gauge       |
| Table       | NonTimeSeriesQuery | Tabular data with rows and columns   |
| Bar Chart   | NonTimeSeriesQuery | Comparisons across categories        |
| Pie Chart   | NonTimeSeriesQuery | Data as slices of a circle |
| Values      | NonTimeSeriesQuery | Values displayed as tiles |

> 

Reviewer 2: Graphics to demonstrate the types could be lovely - IDK maybe we make 1 graphic with each type in a grid? I can help if you want to collaborate on this? 

![different-types-of-charts-and-graphs-set-column-pie-area-line-graphs-data-analysis-financial-report-business-analytics-illustration-infographic-statistics-graph-vector](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c9e42f64-8d0c-4622-a6bc-9378336250da)

---

## Writing Queries

Logfire uses SQL to define dashboard queries.

If you're unsure which tables or columns are available, refer to the [records schema](explore.md#records-schema) and [metrics schema](explore.md#metrics-schema).

### Variable Usage

You can reference dashboard variables in SQL queries using the `$variable` syntax:

```sql
SELECT * FROM records WHERE service_name = $service_name
```

Variables can only be used in SQL queries. They cannot be used in chart titles or other non-query fields.

### Resolution Variable

All dashboards have access to a special `$resolution` variable that can be used in your queries. This value is dynamically selected based on the dashboard's time duration to ensure optimal performance and data density. You can use it for time bucketing:

```sql
SELECT
  time_bucket($resolution, start_timestamp) AS x,
  count(1) as count
FROM records
GROUP BY x;
```

---

## Layout, Duration, and Refresh

Each dashboard has settings for:

* **Layout**: Panels are arranged on a grid. You can drag panels to move and resize them.
* **Duration**: Controls the time range for the data shown (e.g., 1h, 6h, 24h).

> * **Refresh Interval**: Sets how often the dashboard automatically refreshes its data.

Reviewer 2: I feel like some extra text maybe an admonition box to explain the difference between Duration and Refresh interval might be helpful here, as these are actually a bit confusing? Maybe we could add an example to illustrate the ideas? 
https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/admonitions/

3. Import the file you downloaded. This creates a new, fully editable custom dashboard from the template.

---

## Creating custom dashboards

To create a dashboard from scratch:

1. Click the **+ Dashboard** button.
2. Select the **Custom** tab.

Custom dashboards are structured in a hierarchy:

- Dashboard
  - Panel Group (1 or more)
    - Panel (1 or more)
      - Chart (1 only, a [specific type](#chart-types))

  By default, new dashboards start with one panel group.

You can add more panel groups to better organize your dashboard. This is useful for grouping related visualizations, effectively allowing you to have multiple views within a single dashboard.

To add a new group, click the **Panel Group** button in the top right. You can name the group and set whether it should be expanded or collapsed by default when the dashboard loads.

To add a new visualization, you add a panel to a group. Click the **Panel** button in the top right. Inside each panel, you'll configure a chart and the SQL query that powers it.

You can rearrange and resize panels by dragging and dropping them after clicking the **Edit layout** button.

### Chart Types

Logfire supports these chart types:

> | Chart Type  | Query Type         | Description                          |

Author: I removed the description column.

| ----------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------ |
| Time Series | TimeSeriesQuery    | Data points over time                |

> | Gauge       | TimeSeriesQuery    | Shows current value as a gauge       |

Author: I feel this is still helpful as an overview. I re-worked the section to give more information about the two type of queries.
